.Dd July 19, 2026
.Dt DIGG 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm digg
.Nd modern DNS lookup utility
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Cm @server No ...
.Op Ar name
.Op Ar type
.Op Fl x Ar addr
.Op Fl p Ar port
.Op Fl c Ar class
.Op Fl f Ar file
.Op Cm +option No ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a DNS lookup tool in the spirit of
.Xr dig 1
with modern defaults: colored human-oriented output, EDNS(0) on by
default, automatic TCP fallback on truncation, UDP retries, and
first-class JSON/YAML/TSV output for scripting.
.Pp
Positional arguments may appear in any order.
A bare IP address argument is automatically converted to a reverse PTR
lookup.
Multiple
.Cm @server
arguments enable comparison mode.
Multiple
.Ar type name
pairs issue multiple queries in one invocation.
Non-ASCII names are converted to punycode A-labels (IDNA/UTS-46) before
being sent.
.Sh ARGUMENTS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm @server
DNS server IP or hostname (default: system resolver).
.It Ar name
Domain name to query (default:
.Ql \&. ) .
.It Ar type
Record type: A AAAA NS MX CNAME TXT SOA PTR SRV CAA HTTPS SVCB DS RRSIG
DNSKEY NSEC NSEC3 NSEC3PARAM AXFR ANY, case-insensitive (default: A).
Any numeric type may be queried with the RFC 3597 syntax
.Ql TYPE Ns Ar N ,
e.g.
.Ql TYPE64512 .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl x Ar addr
Reverse DNS lookup: builds the PTR query for an IPv4 or IPv6 address.
.It Fl p Ar port
DNS server port (default: 53).
.It Fl c Ar class
Query class: IN, CH, HS, ANY, or numeric
.Ql CLASS Ns Ar N
(default: IN).
CHAOS-class queries enable classics such as
.Ql digg @ns1 -c CH version.bind TXT .
.It Fl f Ar file
Batch mode: read queries from a file, one per line
.Pf ( Ql -
for stdin).
Each line may contain a name, a type, and an
.Cm @server ,
in any order.
.It Fl h , Fl -help
Show usage.
.It Fl V , Fl -version
Show version.
.El
.Sh QUERY OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm +short
Terse output: one rdata value per line.
.It Cm +json , +yaml
Structured output including timing, transport, and the full message.
.It Cm +tsv
Machine-readable output: one answer record per line as
.Ql name<TAB>ttl<TAB>class<TAB>type<TAB>rdata .
Field order, separator, and raw-seconds TTL are a stability contract and
will not change within a major version.
Tabs, newlines, and backslashes inside rdata are escaped as
.Ql \et , \en , \e\e .
.It Cm +compat
Classic dig-style presentation output for legacy parsers.
.It Cm +tcp , +notcp
Force TCP, or force UDP-only.
.It Cm +recurse , +norecurse
Enable (default) or disable recursion.
.It Cm +timeout Ns = Ns Ar N
Per-try query timeout in seconds (default: 5).
.It Cm +retry Ns = Ns Ar N
UDP retries after a timeout (default: 2;
.Cm +retry=0
disables).
Only timeouts retry; other errors fail immediately.
.It Cm +edns , +noedns
Enable (default) or disable EDNS(0).
.It Cm +subnet Ns = Ns Ar IP Ns Op / Ns Ar N
Send an EDNS Client Subnet option (RFC 7871).
Default prefix: /24 for IPv4, /56 for IPv6.
.Cm +subnet=0
sends the privacy opt-out (source prefix 0), asking the resolver not to
forward any client subnet.
The returned scope is shown on the EDNS line.
.It Cm +nsid
Request the server identifier (RFC 5001); useful for identifying which
anycast instance answered.
.El
.Sh SECURITY OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm +dnssec
Request DNSSEC records (sets the DO bit).
.It Cm +validate
Validate the DNSSEC chain of trust locally, from the answer's signing
zone up to the built-in IANA root anchors, without trusting the
resolver's AD bit.
Reports each link and an overall SECURE, INSECURE, or BOGUS status.
Implies
.Cm +dnssec .
.It Cm +cd , +nocd
Set (or clear) the checking-disabled (CD) bit so a validating resolver
returns DNSSEC-bogus data instead of SERVFAIL; pairs with
.Cm +validate
to diagnose which link is broken.
.It Cm +dot
DNS-over-TLS on port 853.
.It Cm +doh Ns Op = Ns Ar provider|URL
DNS-over-HTTPS.
Known providers: cloudflare (default), google, quad9, opendns, adguard,
wikimedia.
Anything else is treated as a custom URL or host.
.El
.Sh DISPLAY OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm +qr , +noqr
Print the outgoing query (destination, flags, question, EDNS) before
sending.
.It Cm +stats , +nostats
Show (default) or hide the server/rcode/time/size footer.
.It Cm +idnout , +noidnout
Display internationalized names as Unicode (default: off; machine
formats always keep A-labels).
.It Cm +idnin , +noidnin
Convert (default) or do not convert non-ASCII query names to punycode.
.It Cm +color , +nocolor
Force or disable colored output.
.It Cm +authority , +noauthority
Show (default) or hide the authority section.
.It Cm +additional , +noadditional
Show (default) or hide the additional section.
.El
.Sh ADVANCED MODES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm +trace
Trace the delegation chain from the root servers.
.It Cm +bench Ns Op = Ns Ar N
Benchmark: repeat the query N times (default: 100) and report latency
statistics with a histogram.
Retries are disabled during benchmarks.
.It Cm +propagation , +prop
Query 10 public resolvers in parallel and report whether answers agree.
.It Cm +watch Ns Op = Ns Ar N
Re-query every N seconds (default: 2) and highlight changes; interrupt
to stop.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width NO_COLOR
.It Ev NO_COLOR
When set to a non-empty value, disables colored output (see
.Lk https://no-color.org ) .
.It Ev HOME
Location of the configuration file.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ~/.diggrc
.It Pa ~/.diggrc
Optional configuration: one option per line, applied before CLI
arguments (so CLI arguments win).
Lines starting with
.Ql #
are ignored.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It 0
Success (NOERROR).
.It 1
Usage error, or the query returned NXDOMAIN.
.It 2
Protocol error (malformed or mismatched response), or a non-NOERROR
rcode other than NXDOMAIN.
.It 9
Network error or timeout (all retries exhausted).
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
digg example.com                       # A record via system resolver
digg @8.8.8.8 example.com MX           # MX via Google DNS
digg 8.8.8.8                           # automatic reverse PTR lookup
digg example.com +short                # terse output
digg example.com +tsv | awk -F'\et' '{print $5}'
digg example.com +dnssec +trace        # delegation chain with DNSSEC
digg cdn.example.com +subnet=203.0.113.0/24   # geo-DNS debugging
digg @1.1.1.1 example.com +nsid        # which anycast node answered?
digg @ns1.example.com -c CH version.bind TXT  # server fingerprint
digg example.com @8.8.8.8 @1.1.1.1     # compare resolvers
digg example.com +prop                 # propagation check
digg -f domains.txt +tsv               # batch to a pipeline
digg AXFR example.com @ns1.example.com # zone transfer
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dig 1 ,
.Xr drill 1 ,
.Xr host 1
.Pp
RFC 1035 (DNS), RFC 3597 (unknown RR types), RFC 5001 (NSID),
RFC 6891 (EDNS), RFC 7871 (Client Subnet), RFC 9460 (SVCB/HTTPS).
